===========
The RESTAPI
===========

Since version 19.5.10 PyDAL includes a restful API called RestAPI. It is
inspired by GraphQL but it’s not quite the same because it is less
powerful but, in the spirit of web2py, more practical and easier to use.
Like GraphSQL RestAPI allows a client to query for information using the
GET method and allows to specify some details about the format of the
response (which references to follow, and how to denormalize the data).
Unlike GraphSQL it allows the server to specify a policy and restrict
which queries are allowed and which one are not. They can be evaluated
dynamically per request based on the user and the state of the server.
As the name implied RestAPI allows all stardard methods GET, POST, PUT,
and DELETE. Each of them can be enabled or disabled based on the policy,
for individual tables and individual fields.

In the examples below we assume an app called “superheroes” and the
following model:

::

   db.define_table(
       'person',
       Field('name'),
       Field('job'))

   db.define_table(
       'superhero',
       Field('name'),
       Field('real_identity', 'reference person'))

   db.define_table(
       'superpower',
       Field('description'))

   db.define_table(
       'tag',
       Field('superhero', 'reference superhero'),
       Field('superpower', 'reference superpower'),
       Field('strength', 'integer'))

We also assume the following controller ``rest.py``:

::

   from pydal.dbapi import RestAPI, Policy

   policy = Policy()
   policy.set('superhero', 'GET', authorize=True, allowed_patterns=['*'])
   policy.set('*', 'GET', authorize=True, allowed_patterns=['*'])

   # for security reasons we disabled here all methods but GET at the policy level, to enable any of them just set authorize = True
   policy.set('*', 'PUT', authorize=False)
   policy.set('*', 'POST', authorize=False)
   policy.set('*', 'DELETE', authorize=False)

   @action('api/<tablename>/', method = ['GET', 'POST'])
   @action('api/<tablename>/<rec_id>', method = ['GET', 'PUT', 'DELETE'])
   def api(tablename, rec_id=None):
       return RestAPI(db, policy)(request.method, 
                                  tablename, 
                                  rec_id,
                                  request.GET, 
                                  request.POST
                                  )

The policy is per table (or \* for all tables and per method. authorize
can be True (allow), False (deny) or a function with the signature
(method, tablename, record_id, get_vars, post_vars) which returns
True/False. For the GET policy one can specify a list of allowed query
patterns (\* for all). A query pattern will be matched against the keys
in the query string.

The above action is exposed as:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/{tablename}

**About request.POST**: keep in mind that **request.POST** only contains
the form data that is posted using a **regular HTML-form** or javascript
**FormData** object. If you post just plain object
(e.g. ``axios.post( 'path/to/api', {field:'some'} )``) you should pass
**request.json** instead of request.POST, since latter will contain just
raw request-body which is string, not json. See bottle.py documentation
for more details.

RestAPI GET
-----------

The general query has the form ``{something}.eq=value`` where ``eq=``
stands for “equal”, ``gt=`` stands for “greater than”, etc. The
expression can be prepended by ``not.``.

``{something}`` can be the name of a field in the table been queried as
in:

**All superheroes called “Superman”**

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?name.eq=Superman

It can be a the name of a field of a table referred by the table been
queried as in:

**All superheroes with real identity “Clark Kent”**

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?real_identity.name.eq=Clark Kent

It can be the name of a field of a table that refers to the table neen
queried as in:

**All superheroes with any tag superpower with strength > 90**

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?superhero.tag.strength.gt=90

(here tag is the name of the link table, the preceding ``superhero`` is
the name of the field that refers to the selected table and ``strength``
is the name of the field used to filter)

It can also be a field of the table referenced by a many-to-many linked
table as in:

**All superheroes with the flight power**

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?superhero.tag.superpower.description.eq=Flight

The key to understand the syntax above is to break it as follows:

::

   superhero?superhero.tag.superpower.description.eq=Flight

and read it as:

   select records of table **superhero** referred by field **superhero**
   of table **tag** when the **superpower** field of said table points
   to a record with **description** **eq**\ ual to “Flight”.

The query allows additional modifiers for example

::

   @offset=10
   @limit=10
   @order=name
   @model=true
   @lookup=real_identity

The first 3 are obvious. @model returns a JSON description of database
model. Lookup denormalizes the linked field.

Here are some practical examples:

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "id": 1
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 2,
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 3,
               "name": "Batman",
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.132635",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?@model=true

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "id": 1
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 2,
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 3,
               "name": "Batman",
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.098292",
       "model": [
           {
               "regex": "[1-9]\\d*",
               "name": "id",
               "default": null,
               "required": false,
               "label": "Id",
               "post_writable": true,
               "referenced_by": [],
               "unique": false,
               "type": "id",
               "options": null,
               "put_writable": true
           },
           {
               "regex": null,
               "name": "name",
               "default": null,
               "required": false,
               "label": "Name",
               "post_writable": true,
               "unique": false,
               "type": "string",
               "options": null,
               "put_writable": true
           },
           {
               "regex": null,
               "name": "real_identity",
               "default": null,
               "required": false,
               "label": "Real Identity",
               "post_writable": true,
               "references": "person",
               "unique": false,
               "type": "reference",
               "options": null,
               "put_writable": true
           }
       ],
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?@lookup=real_identity

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": {
                   "name": "Clark Kent",
                   "job": "Journalist",
                   "id": 1
               },
               "name": "Superman",
               "id": 1
           },
           {
               "real_identity": {
                   "name": "Peter Park",
                   "job": "Photographer",
                   "id": 2
               },
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "real_identity": {
                   "name": "Bruce Wayne",
                   "job": "CEO",
                   "id": 3
               },
               "name": "Batman",
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.178974",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?@lookup=identity:real_identity

(denormalize the real_identity and rename it identity)

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "id": 1,
               "identity": {
                   "name": "Clark Kent",
                   "job": "Journalist",
                   "id": 1
               }
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 2,
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "id": 2,
               "identity": {
                   "name": "Peter Park",
                   "job": "Photographer",
                   "id": 2
               }
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 3,
               "name": "Batman",
               "id": 3,
               "identity": {
                   "name": "Bruce Wayne",
                   "job": "CEO",
                   "id": 3
               }
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.123218",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?@lookup=identity!:real_identity[name,job]

(denormalize the real_identity [but only fields name and job], collapse
the with the identity prefix)

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "name": "Superman",
               "identity_job": "Journalist",
               "identity_name": "Clark Kent",
               "id": 1
           },
           {
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "identity_job": "Photographer",
               "identity_name": "Peter Park",
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "name": "Batman",
               "identity_job": "CEO",
               "identity_name": "Bruce Wayne",
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.192180",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?@lookup=superhero.tag

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "superhero.tag": [
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superhero": 1,
                       "id": 1,
                       "superpower": 1
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superhero": 1,
                       "id": 2,
                       "superpower": 2
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superhero": 1,
                       "id": 3,
                       "superpower": 3
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superhero": 1,
                       "id": 4,
                       "superpower": 4
                   }
               ],
               "id": 1
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 2,
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "superhero.tag": [
                   {
                       "strength": 50,
                       "superhero": 2,
                       "id": 5,
                       "superpower": 2
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 75,
                       "superhero": 2,
                       "id": 6,
                       "superpower": 3
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 10,
                       "superhero": 2,
                       "id": 7,
                       "superpower": 4
                   }
               ],
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 3,
               "name": "Batman",
               "superhero.tag": [
                   {
                       "strength": 80,
                       "superhero": 3,
                       "id": 8,
                       "superpower": 2
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 20,
                       "superhero": 3,
                       "id": 9,
                       "superpower": 3
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 70,
                       "superhero": 3,
                       "id": 10,
                       "superpower": 4
                   }
               ],
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.201988",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?@lookup=superhero.tag.superpower

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "superhero.tag.superpower": [
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superhero": 1,
                       "id": 1,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 1,
                           "description": "Flight"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superhero": 1,
                       "id": 2,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 2,
                           "description": "Strength"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superhero": 1,
                       "id": 3,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 3,
                           "description": "Speed"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superhero": 1,
                       "id": 4,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 4,
                           "description": "Durability"
                       }
                   }
               ],
               "id": 1
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 2,
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "superhero.tag.superpower": [
                   {
                       "strength": 50,
                       "superhero": 2,
                       "id": 5,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 2,
                           "description": "Strength"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 75,
                       "superhero": 2,
                       "id": 6,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 3,
                           "description": "Speed"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 10,
                       "superhero": 2,
                       "id": 7,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 4,
                           "description": "Durability"
                       }
                   }
               ],
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 3,
               "name": "Batman",
               "superhero.tag.superpower": [
                   {
                       "strength": 80,
                       "superhero": 3,
                       "id": 8,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 2,
                           "description": "Strength"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 20,
                       "superhero": 3,
                       "id": 9,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 3,
                           "description": "Speed"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 70,
                       "superhero": 3,
                       "id": 10,
                       "superpower": {
                           "id": 4,
                           "description": "Durability"
                       }
                   }
               ],
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.322494",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL (it's a single line, splitted for readability):

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?
   @lookup=powers:superhero.tag[strength].superpower[description]

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "powers": [
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Flight"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Strength"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Speed"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Durability"
                       }
                   }
               ],
               "id": 1
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 2,
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "powers": [
                   {
                       "strength": 50,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Strength"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 75,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Speed"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 10,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Durability"
                       }
                   }
               ],
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 3,
               "name": "Batman",
               "powers": [
                   {
                       "strength": 80,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Strength"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 20,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Speed"
                       }
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 70,
                       "superpower": {
                           "description": "Durability"
                       }
                   }
               ],
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.309903",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL (it's a single line, splitted for readability):

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?
   @lookup=powers!:superhero.tag[strength].superpower[description]

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "powers": [
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "description": "Flight"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "description": "Strength"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "description": "Speed"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "description": "Durability"
                   }
               ],
               "id": 1
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 2,
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "powers": [
                   {
                       "strength": 50,
                       "description": "Strength"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 75,
                       "description": "Speed"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 10,
                       "description": "Durability"
                   }
               ],
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 3,
               "name": "Batman",
               "powers": [
                   {
                       "strength": 80,
                       "description": "Strength"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 20,
                       "description": "Speed"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 70,
                       "description": "Durability"
                   }
               ],
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.355181",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL (it's a single line, splitted for readability):

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?
   @lookup=powers!:superhero.tag[strength].superpower[description],
   identity!:real_identity[name]

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 3,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "name": "Superman",
               "identity_name": "Clark Kent",
               "powers": [
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "description": "Flight"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "description": "Strength"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "description": "Speed"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 100,
                       "description": "Durability"
                   }
               ],
               "id": 1
           },
           {
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "identity_name": "Peter Park",
               "powers": [
                   {
                       "strength": 50,
                       "description": "Strength"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 75,
                       "description": "Speed"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 10,
                       "description": "Durability"
                   }
               ],
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "name": "Batman",
               "identity_name": "Bruce Wayne",
               "powers": [
                   {
                       "strength": 80,
                       "description": "Strength"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 20,
                       "description": "Speed"
                   },
                   {
                       "strength": 70,
                       "description": "Durability"
                   }
               ],
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.396583",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?name.eq=Superman

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 1,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "id": 1
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.405515",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?real_identity.name.eq=Clark Kent

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 1,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "id": 1
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.366288",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?not.real_identity.name.eq=Clark Kent

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 2,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 2,
               "name": "Spiderman",
               "id": 2
           },
           {
               "real_identity": 3,
               "name": "Batman",
               "id": 3
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.451907",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

URL:

::

   /superheroes/rest/api/superhero?superhero.tag.superpower.description=Flight

OUTPUT:

::

   {
       "count": 1,
       "status": "success",
       "code": 200,
       "items": [
           {
               "real_identity": 1,
               "name": "Superman",
               "id": 1
           }
       ],
       "timestamp": "2019-05-19T05:38:00.453020",
       "api_version": "0.1"
   }

Notice all RestAPI response have the fields

::

   {
       "api_version": ...
       "timestamp": ...
       "status": ...    
       "code": ...
   }

and some optional fields:

::

   {
       "count": ... (total matching, not total returned, for GET)
       "items": ... (in response to a GET)
       "errors": ... (usually validation error0
       "models": ... (usually if status != success)
       "message": ... (is if error)
   }

The exact specs are subject to change since this is a new feature.
