Fixtures
========

A fixture is defined as “a piece of equipment or furniture which is
fixed in position in a building or vehicle”. In our case a fixture is
something attached to the action that processes an HTTP request in order
to produce a response.

When processing any HTTP requests there are some optional operations we
may want to perform. For example parse the cookie to look for session
information, commit a database transaction, determine the preferred
language from the HTTP header and lookup proper internationalization,
etc. These operations are optional. Some actions need them and some
actions do not. They may also depend on each other. For example, if
sessions are stored in the database and our action needs it, we may need
to parse the session cookie from the header, pick up a connection from
the database connection pool, and - after the action has been executed -
save the session back in the database if data has changed.

PY4WEB fixtures provide a mechanism to specify what an action needs so
that py4web can accomplish the required tasks (and skip non required
ones) in the most efficient manner. Fixtures make the code efficient and
reduce the need for boilerplate code.

PY4WEB fixtures are similar to WSGI middleware and BottlePy plugin
except that they apply to individual actions, not to all of them, and
can depend on each other.

PY4WEB comes with some pre-defined fixtures for actions that need
sessions, database connections, internationalization, authentication,
and templates. Their usage will be explained in this chapter. The
Developer is also free to add fixtures, for example, to handle a third
party template language or third party session logic.

Important about Fixtures
------------------------

In the examples below we will explain how to apply individual fixtures.
In practice fixtures can be applied in groups. For example:

::

   preferred = action.uses(Session, Auth, T, Flash)

Then you can apply all of the at once with:

::

   @action('index.html')
   @preferred
   def index():
       return dict()

Templates
---------

PY4WEB, by default uses the yatl template language and provides a
fixture for it.

.. code:: python

   from py4web import action
   from py4web.core import Template

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(Template('index.html', delimiters='[[ ]]'))
   def index(): 
       return dict(message="Hello world")

Note: This example assumes that you created the application from the
scaffolding app, so that the template index.html is already created for
you.

The Template object is a Fixture. It transforms the ``dict()`` returned
by the action into a string by using the ``index.html`` template file.
In a later chapter we will provide an example of how to define a custom
fixture to use a different template language, for example Jinja2.

Notice that since the use of templates is very common and since, most
likely, every action uses a different template, we provide some
syntactic sugar, and the two following lines are equivalent:

.. code:: python

   @action.uses('index.html')
   @action.uses(Template('index.html', delimiters='[[ ]]')

Notice that py4web template files are cached in RAM. The py4web caching
object is described later.

Sessions
--------

The session object is also a Fixture. Here is a typical example of usage
to implement a counter.

::

   from py4web import Session, action
   session = Session(secret='my secret key')

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(session)
   def index():
       counter = session.get('counter', -1)
       counter += 1
       session['counter'] = counter
       return "counter = %i" % counter

Notice that the session object has the same interface as a Python
dictionary.

By default the session object is stored in a cookie called, signed and
encrypted, using the provided secret. If the secret changes existing
sessions are invalidated. If the user switches from HTTP to HTTPS or
vice versa, the user session is invalidated. Session in cookies have a
small size limit (4Kbytes after being serialized and encrypted) so do
not put too much into them.

In py4web sessions are dictionaries but they are stored using JSON (JWT
specifically) therefore you should only store objects that are JSON
serializable. If the object is not JSON serializable, it will be
serialized using the ``__str__`` operator and some information may be
lost.

By default py4web sessions never expire (unless they contain login
information, but that is another story) even if an expiration can be
set. Other parameters can be specified as well:

::

   session = Session(secret='my secret key',
                     expiration=3600,
                     algorithm='HS256',
                     storage=None,
                     same_site='Lax')

-  Here ``algorithm`` is the algorithm to be used for the JWT token
   signature.
-  ``storage`` is a parameter that allows to specify an alternate
   session storage method (for example redis, or database).
-  ``same_site`` is an option that prevents CSRF attacks and is enabled
   by default. You can read more about it
   `here <https://www.owasp.org/index.php/SameSite>`__.

Session in memcache
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

   import memcache, time
   conn = memcache.Client(['127.0.0.1:11211'], debug=0)
   session = Session(storage=conn)

Notice that a secret is not required when storing cookies in memcache
because in this case the cookie only contains the UUID of the session.

Session in redis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

   import redis
   conn = redis.Redis(host='localhost', port=6379)
   conn.set = lambda k, v, e, cs=conn.set, ct=conn.ttl: (cs(k, v), e and ct(e))
   session = Session(storage=conn)

Notice: a storage object must have ``get`` and ``set`` methods and the
``set`` method must allow to specify an expiration. The redis connection
object has a ``ttl`` method to specify the expiration, hence we monkey
patch the ``set`` method to have the expected signature and
functionality.

Session in database
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

   from py4web import Session, DAL
   from py4web.utils.dbstore import DBStore
   db = DAL('sqlite:memory')
   session =  Session(storage=DBStore(db))

A secret is not required when storing cookies in the database because in
this case the cookie only contains the UUID of the session.

Also this is one case when the a fixture (session) requires another
fixture (db). This is handled automatically by py4web and the following
are equivalent:

.. code:: python

   @action.uses(session)
   @action.uses(db, session)

Session anywhere
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can easily store sessions in any place you want. All you need to do
is provide to the ``Session`` object a ``storage`` object with both
``get`` and ``set`` methods. For example, imagine you want to store
sessions on your local filesystem:

.. code:: python

   import os
   import json

   class FSStorage:
      def __init__(self, folder):
          self.folder = folder
      def get(self, key):
          filename = os.path.join(self.folder, key)
          if os.path.exists(filename):
              with open(filename) as fp:
                 return json.load(fp)
          return None
      def set(self, key, value, expiration=None):
          filename = os.path.join(self.folder, key)
          with open(filename, 'w') as fp:
              json.dump(value, fp)

   session = Session(storage=FSStorage('/tmp/sessions'))

We leave to you as an exercise to implement expiration, limit the number
of files per folder by using subfolders, and implement file locking. Yet
we do not recomment storing sessions on the filesystem: it is
inefficient and does not scale well.

Translator
----------

Here is an example of usage:

.. code:: python

   from py4web import action, Translator
   import os

   T_FOLDER = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), 'translations')
   T = Translator(T_FOLDER)

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(T)
   def index(): return str(T('Hello world'))

The string ’hello world\` will be translated based on the
internationalization file in the specified “translations” folder that
best matches the HTTP ``accept-language`` header.

Here ``Translator`` is a py4web class that extends
``pluralize.Translator`` and also implements the ``Fixture`` interface.

We can easily combine multiple fixtures. Here, as example, we make
action with a counter that counts “visits”.

.. code:: python

   from py4web import action, Session, Translator, DAL
   from py4web.utils.dbstore import DBStore
   import os
   db = DAL('sqlite:memory')
   session =  Session(storage=DBStore(db))
   T_FOLDER = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), 'translations')
   T = Translator(T_FOLDER)

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(session, T)
   def index():
       counter = session.get('counter', -1)
       counter += 1
       session['counter'] = counter
       return str(T("You have been here {n} times").format(n=counter))

Now create the following translation file ``translations/en.json``:

.. code:: json

   {"You have been here {n} times": 
     {
       "0": "This your first time here", 
       "1": "You have been here once before", 
       "2": "You have been here twice before",
       "3": "You have been here {n} times",
       "6": "You have been here more than 5 times"
     }
   }

When visiting this site with the browser language preference set to
english and reloading multiple times you will get the following
messages:

::

   This your first time here
   You have been here once before
   You have been here twice before
   You have been here 3 times
   You have been here 4 times
   You have been here 5 times
   You have been here more than 5 times

Now try create a file called ``translations/it.json`` which contains:

.. code:: json

   {"You have been here {n} times":
     {
       "0": "Non ti ho mai visto prima",
       "1": "Ti ho gia' visto",
       "2": "Ti ho gia' visto 2 volte",
       "3": "Ti ho visto {n} volte",
       "6": "Ti ho visto piu' di 5 volte"
     }
   }

and set your browser preference to Italian.

The Flash fixture
-----------------

It is common to want to display “alerts” to the suers. Here we refer to
them as flash messeges. There is a little more to it than just
displaying a message to the view because flash messages can have state
that must be preserved after redirection. Also they can be generated
both server side and client side, there can be only one at the time,
they may have a type, and they should be dismissible.

The Flash helper handles the server side of them. Here is an example:

::

   from py4web import Flash

   flash = Flash()

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(Flash)
   def index():
       flash.set("Hello World", _class="info", sanitize=True)
       return dict()

and in the template:

::

   ...
   <div id="py4web-flash"></div>
   ...
   <script src="js/utils.js"></script>
   [[if globals().get('flash'):]]<script>utils.flash([[=XML(flash)]]);</script>[[pass]]

By setting the value of the message in the flash helper, a flash
variable is returned by the action and this trigger the JS in the
template to inject the message in the ``#py4web-flash`` DIV which you
can position at your convenience. Also the optional class is applied to
the injected HTML.

If a page is redirected after a flash is set, the flash is remembered.
This is achieved by asking the browser to keep the message temporarily
in a one-time cookie. After redirection the message is sent back by the
browser to the server and the server sets it again automatically before
returning content, unless it is overwritten by another set.

The client can also set/add flash messages by calling:

::

   utils.flash({'message': 'hello world', 'class': 'info'});

py4web defaults to an alert class called ``default`` and most CSS
frameworks define classes for alerts called ``success``, ``error``,
``warning``, ``default``, and ``info``. Yet, there is nothing in py4web
that hardcodes those names. You can use your own class names.

The DAL fixture
---------------

We have already used the ``DAL`` fixture in the context of sessions but
maybe you want direct access to the DAL object for the purpose of
accessing the database, not just sessions.

PY4WEB, by default, uses the PyDAL (Python Database Abstraction Layer)
which is documented in a later chapter. Here is an example, please
remember to create the ``databases`` folder under your project in case
it doesn’t exist:

.. code:: python

   from datetime import datetime
   from py4web import action, request, DAL, Field
   import os

   DB_FOLDER = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), 'databases')
   db = DAL('sqlite://storage.db', folder=DB_FOLDER, pool_size=1)
   db.define_table('visit_log', Field('client_ip'), Field('timestamp', 'datetime'))
   db.commit()

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(db)
   def index():
       client_ip = request.environ.get('REMOTE_ADDR')
       db.visit_log.insert(client_ip=client_ip, timestamp=datetime.utcnow())
       return "Your visit was stored in database"

Notice that the database fixture defines (creates/re-creates tables)
automatically when py4web starts (and every time it reloads this app)
and picks a connection from the connection pool at every HTTP request.
Also each call to the ``index()`` action is wrapped into a transaction
and it commits ``on_success`` and rolls back ``on_error``.

Caveats about Fixtures
----------------------

Since fixtures are shared by multiple actions you are not allowed to
change their state because it would not be thread safe. There is one
exception to this rule. Actions can change some attributes of database
fields:

.. code:: python

   from py4web import Field, action, request, DAL, Field
   from py4web.utils.form import Form
   import os

   DB_FOLDER = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), 'databases')
   db = DAL('sqlite://storage.db', folder=DB_FOLDER, pool_size=1)
   db.define_table('thing', Field('name', writable=False))

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(db, 'generic.html')
   def index():
       db.thing.name.writable = True
       form = Form(db.thing)
       return dict(form=form)
   )

Note thas this code will only be able to display a form, to process it
after submit, additional code needs to be added, as we will see later
on. This example is assuming that you created the application from the
scaffolding app, so that a generic.html is already created for you.

The ``readable``, ``writable``, ``default``, ``update``, and ``require``
attributes of ``db.{table}.{field}`` are special objects of class
``ThreadSafeVariable`` defined the ``threadsafevariable`` module. These
objects are very much like Python thread local objects but they are
re-initialized at every request using the value specified outside of the
action. This means that actions can safely change the values of these
attributes.

Custom fixtures
---------------

A fixture is an object with the following minimal structure:

.. code:: python

   from py4web import Fixture

   class MyFixture(Fixture):
       def on_request(self): pass
       def on_success(self): pass
       def on_error(self): pass
       def transform(self, data): return data

if an action uses this fixture:

::

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(MyFixture())
   def index(): return 'hello world'

Then ``on_request()`` is guaranteed to be called before the ``index()``
function is called. The ``on_success()`` is guaranteed to be called if
the ``index()`` function returns successfully or raises ``HTTP`` or
performs a ``redirect``. The ``on_error()`` is guaranteed to be called
when the ``index()`` function raises any exception other than ``HTTP``.
The ``transform`` function is called to perform any desired
transformation of the value returned by the ``index()`` function.

Auth and Auth.user
------------------

``auth`` and ``auth.user`` are both fixtures. They depend on
``session``. The role of access is to provide the action with
authentication information. It is used as follows:

.. code:: python

   from py4web import action, redirect, Session, DAL, URL
   from py4web.utils.auth import Auth
   import os

   session = Session(secret='my secret key')
   DB_FOLDER = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), 'databases')
   db = DAL('sqlite://storage.db', folder=DB_FOLDER, pool_size=1)
   auth = Auth(session, db)
   auth.enable()

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(auth)
   def index():
       user = auth.get_user() or redirect(URL('auth/login'))
       return 'Welcome %s' % user.get('first_name')

The constructor of the ``Auth`` object defines the ``auth_user`` table
with the following fields: username, email, password, first_name,
last_name, sso_id, and action_token (the last two are mostly for
internal use).

``auth.enable()`` registers multiple actions including
``{appname}/auth/login`` and it requires the presence of the
``auth.html`` template and the ``auth`` value component provided by the
``_scaffold`` app.

The ``auth`` object is the fixture. It manages the user information. It
exposes a single method:

::

   auth.get_user()

which returns a python dictionary containing the information of the
currently logged in user. If the user is not logged-in, it returns
``None``. The code of the example redirects to the ‘auth/login’ page if
there is no user.

Since this check is very common, py4web provides an additional fixture
``auth.user``:

.. code:: python

   @action('index')
   @action.uses(auth.user)
   def index():
       user = auth.get_user()
       return 'Welcome %s' % user.get('first_name')

This fixture automatically redirects to the ``auth/login`` page if user
is not logged-in. It depends on ``auth``, which depends on ``db`` and
``session``.

The ``Auth`` fixture is plugin based and supports multiple plugin
methods. They include Oauth2 (Google, Facebook, Twitter), PAM, LDAP, and
SMAL2.

Here is an example of using the Google Oauth2 plugin:

.. code:: python

   from py4web.utils.auth_plugins.oauth2google import OAuth2Google
   auth.register_plugin(OAuth2Google(
       client_id='...',
       client_secret='...',
       callback_url='auth/plugin/oauth2google/callback'))

The ``client_id`` and ``client_secret`` are provided by google. The
callback url is the default option for py4web and it must be whitelisted
with Google. All ``Auth`` plugins are objects. Different plugins are
configured in different ways but they are registered using
``auth.register_plugin(...)``. Examples are provided in
``_scaffold/common.py``.

Caching and Memoize
-------------------

py4web provides a cache in ram object that implements the Last Recently
Used (LRU) Algorithm. It can be used to cache any function via a
decorator:

.. code:: python

   import uuid
   from py4web import Cache, action
   cache = Cache(size=1000)

   @action('hello/<name>')
   @cache.memoize(expiration=60)
   def hello(name):
       return "Hello %s your code is %s" % (name, uuid.uuid4())

It will cache (memoize) the return value of the ``hello`` function, as
function of the input ``name``, for up to 60 seconds. It will store in
cache the 1000 most recently used values. The data is always stored in
ram.

The Cache object is not a fixture and it should not and cannot be
registered using the ``@action.uses`` object but we mention it here
because some of the fixtures use this object internally. For example,
template files are cached in ram to avoid accessing the file system
every time a template needs to be rendered.

Convenience Decorators
----------------------

The ``_scaffold`` application, in ``common.py`` defines two special
conveniennce decorators:

::

   @unauthenticated
   def index():
       return dict()

and

\`\ ``@authenticated def index():     return dict()``

They apply all of the decorators below, use a template with the same
name as the function (.html), and also register a route with the name of
action followed the number of arguments of the action separated by a
slash (/).

@unauthenticated does not require the user to be logged in.
@authenticated required the user to be logged in.

If can be combined with (and precede) other ``@action.uses(...)`` but
they should not be combined with ``@action(...)`` because they perform
that function automatically.
